# Markov Models of LC axon distributions

This capsule contains a supplemental analysis for the morphology of LC axon distributions. We generated a series of Markov models of axon distribution. The reproducible run will run the notebook Alex_supplemental_figure_script, and save all figures. 

Here we develop a series of models to compare to the distribution of LC-NE axons across the brain. The first model (v1), which we can refute by observation, is that all LC-NE neurons project equally to the entire brain. The second model (v2) posits that each LC-NE neuron projects randomly across the brain. We can assess this model by shuffling the projections of each neuron across brain regions and comparing the resulting shuffled data with the original. As expected, the shuffled data loses the structured correlation matrix of the original data. However, this model ignores anatomical constraints of the brain.  

The third model (v3) posits that LC-NE neurons distribute their axons by a random walk across the brain. We constrained this random walk by learning the connection probabilities between coarse brain regions by averaging across all LC-NE neurons in our dataset. Each simulated neuron starts in the LC, which in our coarse brain regions is part of the pons and takes 10-µm steps. On each step, the axon branch transitions to a new brain region according to the transition matrix, branches at a fixed rate, and terminates at a fixed rate. Branching and termination rates were determined by counting the total number of branches and terminations and dividing by the total axon length. Each axon branch then grows independently according to the same Markov process. Simulating 400 neurons from the model fails to match the data, because the Markov model generates axon lengths that are exponentially distributed, so most neurons never leave the pons. 

The fourth model (v4) modifies the branching and termination rates to be dependent on the axonal length from the soma. Examining the data we find that branching and termination are roughly matched within each brain region. However, when looking at branching and termination as a function of axon length from the soma, we see both rates increase over the first 10 cm, with the branching rate larger than the termination rate. This model still has many neurons that are very short and stay in the pons.  

The fifth model (v5) adds a minimum axon length of 10,000 um to match the shortest neuron in the dataset. Additionally, it adds a Weibull renewal process that stops all active axon processes. The Weibull renewal process has a hazard function that is dependent on the overall axonal length of the cell and then results in a Weibull distribution. We fit a Weibull distribution to the LC-NE neurons in our dataset, using neurons with complete reconstructions as uncensored observations, and neurons with incomplete spinal cord projections as censored observations. This model is not an exact replica of the data, but gets surprisingly close. The model under-projects to the isocortex, while over-projecting to the thalamus, and to the cerebellum. The correlation matrix matches the anterior/posterior block structure observed in the data.  

## Conclusions 

We are able to reject several models of LC-NE axon distribution: all LC-NE axons project equally across the brain, all LC-NE axons project randomly across the brain, LC-NE axons are Markov random walks with Markov branching and termination processes, LC-NE axons are Markov random walks with length dependent branching and termination.  

The final model, LC-NE axons are Markov random walks with a Weibull renewal process for termination of all branches, is not a quantitative fit to the data. In that sense, we can reject it as well. However, it gets surprisingly close to replicating coarse features of the data.  

There are several possible limitations of this model. First, the learned transition matrix is very sensitive to CCF registration errors. Slight misalignments of imaged brains to the CCF template make it hard to accurately estimate transition to and from small narrow structures like the fiber tracts. Second, our approach does not differentiate between axons passing through a structure, like the midbrain, and those heavily innervating that structure. Third, our model ignores that brain regions have non-zero width, so axons cannot pass through a brain structure in one model step. A semi-markovian model would be more accurate, but also more complex. Fourth, incomplete spinal cord reconstructions could be influencing our estimates of the termination and branching rates, as well as our overall length estimates. Finally, our model ignores the developmental organization of the brain, and performs the random walk on the adult brain. 

LC-NE cell types might modify a random walk process in several ways. For instance, soma position within the LC could bias the direction in which axons leave the pons, resulting in more anterior or posterior projections. Second, gene expression could bias your sensitivity to chemical gradients that direct axon growth. In this way we can consider cell types as modification of the average transition matrix. 